### 1. Introduction

The

The distinction of

Numerous studies have been published on the diversity of the

In this study, we focused on phytochemical, antioxidant, morphometric characters and texture traits of

### 2. Results

### 2.1. Phytochemical Characteristics

The phytochemical contents showed that the

The

### 2.2. Antioxidant Activity

The antioxidant activity of Malva aqueous extracts was assessed using three tests: DPPH, FRAP, and Total Antioxidant Activity (TAA). The results indicated that all extracts exhibited antioxidant activity (

### 2.3. Morphometric and Texture Characters of Malva Fruits

The morphometric (16 parameters) and texture (8 parameters) traits of

### 2.4. Multivariate Analysis

The PCA is a statistical technique used to reduce the dimensionality of data while preserving as much variability as possible and is a valuable tool to improve the process of group structuration based on used data. The PCA was applied on phytochemical characteristics, antioxidant potential, morphometry, and texture. The first two axes of PCA explained 71.44% of total variation (

### 3. Discussion

### 3.1. Phytochemical Data

With regards to phytochemical content and antioxidant potential,

On the other hand, the secondary metabolites synthesized by plants are used for protection and defense mechanisms and they are very useful in chemotaxonomic classification including glycoside, alkaloid, volatile oil, flavonoids, polyphenols, and terpenoids [

Herein, we found that

Regarding the

Concerning

Divers’ methods were used to assess the antioxidant activity of plant extract [

In general, our results indicated that the extracts from the three fruit species exhibited antioxidant activity with significant variation. Accordingly, these species with antioxidant potential may be beneficial for preventive medicine or as dietary supplements to support overall health.

### 3.2. Morphometric and Texture

The morphometric and texture features based on imagery tools of seeds, stones, and fruits were used to study interspecific variation [

### 3.3. Multivariate Analysis

In this study, species characterization was carried out by considering the combination of all data, and results showed that the data integration of phytochemical, antioxidant potential, and morphometry allowed a clear species group’s structure. Accordingly, the total polyphenol and flavonoid contents could be used as phytochemical tools with morphometry and texture features to distinguish the

### 4. Materials and Methods

### 4.1. Malva Fruits Sampling

The fruit from three

The harvested

### 4.2. Preparation of the Fruit Extract

The aqueous extraction by maceration was conducted using 1 g of dry, homogenized powdered fruits immersed in 10 mL of distilled water. The mixture was kept under magnetic stirring, incubated for 24 h in the dark and at 25 °C. Finally, the solutions were filtered using Wattman filter paper and the obtained extract was labelled and stored at 4 °C until use [

### 4.3. Determination of Total Polyphenols Content

The total polyphenols content (TPC) was estimated using the Folin–Ciocalteu method with modifications. A quantity of 63 μL of extract sample was mixed with 63 μL of the Folin–Ciocalteu reagent in a 96-well plate. After 5 min, 625 μL of 7.5% sodium carbonate (Na

### 4.4. Determination of Total Flavonoid Content

The total flavonoid content (TFC) was determined by the aluminum trichloride method. A quantity of 125 μL of each extract was mixed with 38 μL of a sodium nitrite NaNO

### 4.5. Determination of Protein Content by LECO Analyzer

Protein content was determined by elemental microanalysis as % nitrogen content x 6.25 using a LECO CHNS-932 analyzer (St. Joseph, MI, USA). This analysis was performed on 1 g sample of dry matter, packed in aluminum foil without any solvent and placed in specific wells of the apparatus. The display indicates the protein content (%) [

### 4.6. Determination of Oil Content

The oil content of Malva fruits was determined by the Soxhlet method. For this, 10 g of powdered fruits were placed into the thimble of the Soxhlet chamber. A volume of 200 mL of petroleum ether was used as extraction solvent in a round bottom flask and assembled for Soxhlet extractor. After complete continuous extraction for 6 h at 65 °C, the petroleum ether was removed by rotary vacuum evaporator [

### 4.7. Total Soluble Sugar and Starch Contents

The extraction was carried out using 10 mg of DM dissolved in 1 mL of 80% ethanol. The mixture was placed in a water bath at 70 °C for 30 min. Afterwards, the solution was cooled on ice, followed by centrifugation for 15 min at 9000 rpm at 4 °C. The obtained supernatant was used for sugar quantification and the pellet for starch quantification. A volume of 50 µL of supernatant was mixed with 2.5 mL of anthrone and 1200 µL of 80% ethanol. The solution was placed at 100 °C in a water bath for 10 min, then cooled on ice. The absorbance was measured at 640 nm. For starch quantification, 1 mL of 80% ethanol was added to the pellet, followed by centrifugation for 15 min at 9000 rpm at 4 °C. After filtration, 1 mL of the obtained supernatant was mixed with 30 µL of 35% perchloric acid and kept for 30 min in ice. Next, 2.5 mL of anthrone was added to 1200 µL of 80% ethanol and 100 µL of the starch extract. The obtained solution was stirred, then placed in a 100 °C water bath for 10 min. Subsequently, the solution was cooled, and the absorbance was measured at 640 nm [

### 4.8. Antioxidant Activity

### 4.8.1. Total Antioxidant Capacity

This assay is based on the reduction of Mo(VI) to Mo(V) by the extract and, subsequently, the formation of a green phosphate/Mo(V) complex at acid pH [

### 4.8.2. Radical Scavenging Ability

The radical scavenging activity of the extracts was measured using the DPPH (1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl) assay as described [

### 4.8.3. Ferric Reducing–Antioxidant Power (FRAP)

The ferric reducing–antioxidant power (FRAP) measures the ability of the tested extracts to reduce ferric iron (Fe

### 4.9. Morphometric and Texture Analysis

The morphometric and texture measures were determined using the free software ImageJ (

### 4.10. Statistical Analyses

All data were expressed as mean ± standard deviations and were subjected to one-way analysis of variance analysis (ANOVA), followed by Duncan’s range multiple tests. In addition, the principal component analysis (PCA) was conducted on morphometry, texture features, and phytochemical data. Statistical analyses were performed using XLSTAT 2022 1.2. software accessed on 5 march 2024 (

### 5. Conclusions

In this study, phytochemical content and morphometric traits of fruits from three

Finally, future work could involve refining phytochemical markers through advanced techniques, such as mass spectrometry or high-performance liquid chromatography, to enhance resolution and increase the number of chemical profiles used for species differentiation. This would pave the way for more targeted and effective applications of