### Introduction

Bee pollen is the substance that bees collect from the male seminal organ in flowers on their feet, pelletize with digestive enzymes, and accumulate in the hive (Taha et al.

Antioxidants are substances that do not form radicals by removing free radicals and oxidative stress (Gülcin

Enzymes such as antioxidants play important roles in the treatment of diseases. hCA II enzyme has been found to be associated with glaucoma disease (Özaslan et al.

In this study, the phytochemical content by LC‐MS/MS, some metabolic enzyme inhibition (AChE, hCA II, and α‐amylase) and antioxidant activities of pollen obtained from Bingöl, an important beekeeping city in Türkiye, were determined for the first time in such a comprehensive manner. The anti‐Alzheimer's disease, antiglaucoma and antidiabetic properties and antioxidant potential of such Bingöl pollen were determined by different methods. In addition, its phytochemical content was screened with 53 different components and found to contain important polyphenols.

### Materials And Methods

### Chemicals

Standard phytochemical substances were purchased from Sigma‐Aldrich (Steinheim, Germany) for use in LC‐MS/MS analysis. Commercial purchases of standards and other chemicals were made from Sigma‐Aldrich Chemie GmbH (Steinheim, Germany) for use in antioxidant and enzyme experiments. The hCA II enzyme was purified by Izol using human erythrocytes and the Sepharose‐4B tyrosine‐sulfanilamide affinity column method (Inci et al.

### Extraction of Pollen

Pollen was obtained from Bingöl province, which has important beekeeping activities in Türkiye. The coordinate of Bingöl province is 39°02′28″ N 40°40′33″D. Pollen collected from the hive was dried in a dark and cool environment. Then, 45 mL of 70% ethanol solvent was added to 15 g of pollen and mixed for 3 days, and extraction was performed by the maceration method. The solvent was removed from the pollen and mixed in the erlene with a rotary evaporator, and the extract was dried. The extraction yield was calculated as 13%. A stock solution was prepared from the dried extract, and this solution was used in the studies. The concentration of the extracts was adjusted as 1 mg/mL.

### Determination of Comprehensive Phytochemical Content by

Chromatographic methods have been used to determine the phytochemical content of pollen, and LC‐MS/MS is one of the most efficient methods and gives results even at low concentrations (Aziza et al.

### Total Phenolic and Flavonoid Contents

Total phenolic and flavonoid contents of pollen extract were determined in accordance with a previous study (Inci et al.

Distilled water (2.3 mL), potassium acetate (0.5 mL, 1.0 M), aluminum chloride (1.5 mL, 10%), and ethanol (1.5 mL, 95%) were added to the pollen stock solution (0.5 mL) to determine the total flavonoid content. The combinations were incubated at room temperature for 30 min before absorbance measurement at 415 nm. Quercetin was used as a standard, and total flavonoid levels were reported as milligrams of quercetin equivalent (QE) per gram of pollen extract.

### Radical Scavenging Assays

### 

Pollen extract was found to have the ability to scavenge 2,2′‐azino‐bis (3‐ethylbenzothiazoline‐sulfonic acid) (ABTS) radicals using Gulcin's technique (Gülçin et al.

### 

Using the Blois method, the 1,1‐diphenyl‐2‐picrylhydrazyl (DPPH∙) scavenging effect of pollen was determined (Blois

### 

With a few minor adjustments, the N,N‐dimethyl‐phenylenediamine (DMPD) radical scavenging capacity of pollen was assessed using the methodology of Fogliano et al. (

### Determination of

The half maximal scavenging concentrations values (IC

### Reducing Ability Assays

### Cu

By modifying the Apak method, the Cu

### Fe

Using a modification of the Oyaizu method, the Fe

### Fe

Ultimately, test tubes were filled with pollen stock and standard solutions that had been generated using the Fe

### Enzyme Inhibition Assay

### 

Using sepharose‐4B‐L‐Tyrosine‐sulfanilamide affinity chromatography, the hCA II isoenzyme was isolated from human erythrocyte cells for this experiment. We have previously published the methods (Karagecili et al.

### 

Sigma‐Aldrich Chemie GmbH served as the investigation's commercial source of AChE. The Ellman et al. (

### α‐Amylase Enzyme Inhibition

The α‐amylase activity was determined by the method of Xiao, Storms, and Tsang (

### Statistical Analysis

Every experiment is run three times for each sample. The data, which are presented as the mean ± SD (

### Results and Discussion

### Phytochemical Content Results by

The results of the quantitative content of 53 different phytochemical components of the pollen sample by LC‐MS/MS are given in Table

LC‐MS/MS chromatograms of standard phytochemicals and pollen are given in Figure

In the pollen sample, 15 components of 53 different phytochemicals were quantitatively determined. Other components could not be detected because they were below the limit of determination. The highest concentration of quinic acid (1.531 mg analyte/g extract) was determined. In general, the phytochemical content of the pollen was not very rich. The chemical forms of the identified compounds are shown in Table

### Total Phenolic and Flavonoid Content Result

The results of the total phenolic and total flavonoid content of pollen extract are given in Table

### Antioxidant Results

The results of the antioxidant reducing assays of pollen extract are given in Table

According to the DPPH radical scavenging assays, the antioxidant properties of pollen were again found to be lower than standard antioxidants. In DPPH

### Enzyme Inhibition Results

The antiglaucoma property of pollen was revealed by hCA II enzyme inhibition, the anticholinergic property by AChE enzyme inhibition, and the antidiabetic property by α‐amylase enzyme inhibition. Enzyme inhibition results are given in Table

Phytochemicals are shown to be the main responsible for biological activities. Among these, especially phenolic compounds, are the leading secondary metabolites. Since bee pollen is of plant origin, its phytochemical content is very important in its biological activities. In the study in which the chemical content and antioxidant properties of bee pollen obtained from the Bayburt province of Türkiye were determined, 23 phenolic compounds were screened by LC–MS/MS, and rutin was detected at the highest concentration. In addition, the total phenolic content of pollen was found to be 173.52 mg GA/g, the flavonoid content was 79.21 mg QE/g, and the CUPRAC antioxidant result was 85.59 mg trolox/g (Gercek, Celik, and Bayram

Total phenolic content was found to be different in different studies. It was found in the range of 44.07–124.2 mg GAE/g in Anzer pollen in Türkiye (Kalaycıoğlu et al.

In a different study, the total phenolic content of pollen was found to be 22.98 mg GAE/g, and the total flavonoid content was 33.09 mg RE/g. In addition, 32 different metabolites were detected in total. Among these, quercitrin, kaempferol and naringenin are flavonoid metabolites. The antioxidant properties of pollen were determined by ABTS, DPPH, and FRAP assays. The DPPH result IC

In this study, the antioxidant properties of a pollen sample from Bingöl were determined by eight different assays. In the literature, there is almost no such comprehensive determination of the antioxidant properties of pollen. In addition, since the hCA II, AChE, and α‐amylase enzyme inhibition properties of Bingöl pollen were not reported in the literature, the antiglaucoma, antidiabetic, and anticholinergic potential of this pollen was brought to the literature for the first time. The determination of the phytochemical content of pollen by LC–MS/MS, one of the state‐of‐the‐art techniques, and analysis by a validated method including 53 different components make this study significant. 15 different significant bioactive phytochemicals were identified. Some of them are quinic acid, rutin, hesperidin, quercetin, acacetin, chrysin, apigenin, amentoflavone, and luteolin. Thus, the comprehensive chemical content and antioxidant, antiglaucoma, antidiabetic, and anticholinergic properties of Bingöl pollen were determined for the first time.

### Conclusions

Pollen is a significant natural food source used by humans in their diet. Its high nutrient content has made it a reason for preference. For this reason, the chemical and phytochemical content, antioxidant properties, and enzyme inhibition potentials of pollen are being investigated. In addition, the chemical content, and biological activities of pollen from different geography and flora are different. For this reason, pollen from different geographies is the subject of research. In this study, it was determined that the phytochemical content of honeybee pollen from Bingöl province was moderate, and its antioxidant properties were generally lower than standard antioxidants. In addition, it was determined that it inhibits hCA II, AChE, and α‐amylase enzymes, which are important metabolic enzymes, and therefore shows antiglaucoma, anticholinergic, and antidiabetic properties. Thus, it is predicted that glaucoma, Alzheimer's, and diabetes patients will benefit from consuming Bingöl bee pollen if they do not have any allergies.

### Author Contributions

### Conflicts of Interest

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.