### Introduction

Between December 2019 and 26 July 2023, the global outbreak of Coronavirus (COVID-19) caused 768,560,727 million cases and 6,952,522 million fatalities.Uganda recorded 171,729 of these cases, with 3,632 deaths (WHO,

Despite disinfectants’ success in eradicating COVID-19 and other associated illnesses, concerns have been expressed regarding how their extensive use can impact animals, aquatic environments, and biodiversity. The majority of hand sanitizers now in use include synthetic fragrances and chemical additives that pose substantial risks to human, health and the environment. Ingredients like triclosan are linked to carcinogenesis, endocrine disruption, allergies, and antimicrobial resistance

The lookout for natural replacements has been spurred by the rising rejection of synthetic chemicals

To address the issues with most commercial sanitizers, researchers are looking for substitute components. A potential solution to the toxicity issue is the development of new hand sanitizer formulas based on botanical and natural ingredients. In place of alcohol-based hand massages, medicinal herbs with recognized antiviral and disinfectant qualities were reportedly employed during COVID-19. Herbal hand sanitizer formulations have been shown to be efficient against pathogens and also safe for human life and the environment

While much research has focused on essential oils from pine stems and needles, there is limited knowledge on the phytoconstituents of its sap. Given its abundance in tropical regions,

### Materials and methods

### Materials

Pine (

### Phytochemical analysis of pine sap

Pine sap was analyzed for the presence of various phytoconstituents. The qualitative determination of these phytochemical compounds was conducted according to the methods described by

### Detection of flavonoids

3 g of pine sap were immersed in 15 mL of 70% ethyl alcohol. The mixture was thereafter shaken vigorously to facilitate dissolving and filtered. 3 drops of ferric chloride solution were added to 1 mL of the essential oil.

### Detection of tannins

3 g of pine sap were immersed in 15 mL of distilled water, with the intention of forming an aqueous solution. However, even after vigorous shaking, only a little part of the sap dissolved in the water. After filtration, 3 drops of ferric chloride solution were added to 1 mL of the aqueous solution.

### Detection of alkaloids

3 g of pine sap were immersed in 13.2 mL of distilled water. Thereafter, 0.8 mL of sulphuric acid (with a concentration of 99%) was added to the mixture of sap and distilled water. Despite vigorous shaking, only a small portion of the sap got dissolved. Thereafter, 1 mL of wagner’s reagent was added to 1 mL of the acidic solution of the extract.

Wagner’s reagent was prepared by dissolving 2 g of iodine and 6 g of potassium iodide in 100 mL of distilled water.

### Detection of anthraquinones

3 mL of the prepared aqueous extract (following the procedure for detecting tannins) was shaken with 3 mL of benzene and filtered. 5 mL of 10% ammonia solution were added to the filtrate and shaken.

### Detection of saponins

3 g of pine sap were immersed in 20 mL of distilled water and then agitated for 10 min.

### Extraction of essential oil from

500 g of Pine sap was hydrodistilled for 3 h, using an apparatus that operated using a similar principle to the Clevenger-type apparatus

### Analysis of bioactive component in pine sap essential oil using Gas chromatography – mass spectrometry (GC–MS)

Analysis of the bioactive components in the oil from

By matching their mass spectra with information from the NIST database, constituents were identified.

### Assessment of antibacterial efficacy of essential oil from pine

The efficacy of essential oil from pine was carried out against six strains of bacteria, that is,

Briefly, Mueller Hinton agar was prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The agar plate surface was inoculated by spreading a volume of the microbial inoculum (ca. 0.5 McFarland standard) over the entire agar surface. Then, a hole with a diameter of 6 mm was punched aseptically with a sterile cork borer. The well was filled with 50 µL of the formulation at the highest concentration. Agar plates were incubated at 37

### Experimental Compliance Statement;

### Results and discussions

### Phytochemical constituents of pine sap

### Detection of flavonoids

A reddish colour was observed which showed the presence of flavonoids.

### Detection of tannins

There was no blackish precipitate observed. Instead, A reddish colour was observed which showed the presence of flavonoids.

### Detection of alkaloids

A reddish-brown precipitate was observed which showed the presence of alkaloids.

### Detection of anthraquinones

There was no observable pink, red or violet colour in the ammonical (lower) phase. Instead, a milky colour was observed which showed the absence of anthraquinones.

### Detection of saponins

Little Foam was observed immediately after agitation. However, it disappeared within 10 s, which showed absence of saponins.

Figure

### Bioactive compounds of pine oil

The essential oil from

The highest concentration of the constituents in the essential oil obtained from

These findings show a unique chemical profile compared to previous studies on

### Biological and pharmacological potential

The essential oil from

β-Pinene, the second most abundant compound, has been studied for its antibacterial and antifungal properties, which may be beneficial in the development of natural antimicrobial formulations for wound care and personal hygiene products (Santana et al.,

Additionally, α-thujene exhibits antibacterial activity, indicating possible use in infection control. (Gözcü S and Akşit Z.

Several minor compounds further enhance the pharmacological relevance of the oil. Camphene and Borneol exhibit some degree of antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory activity indicating its potential for broader therapeutic use. (Sri et al.,

The compounds collectively enhance the versatility of

### Antibacterial efficacy of essential oil from pine sap

The examination of in vitro antibacterial activity of the essential oil from pine showed no inhibitory effect on bacterial growth. The results of essential oil from pine sap against different bacterial species are presented in Table

In previous studies, the antimicrobial efficacy analysis of three

### Conclusions

This study contributes to the growing body of knowledge on the chemical and biological properties of

Although the antimicrobial efficacy test showed that the essential oil did not exhibit inhibitory activity against