### 1. Introduction

Phytochemical diversity has become a focus of modern chemical ecology, due partly to a greater recognition of the advantages of defensive redundancy (i.e., having multiple secondary metabolites with putatively similar defensive roles) and advances in metabolomics [

An important goal of chemical ecology and agricultural sciences is to narrow the knowledge gap about how chemical profiles shift under changing resource availability, including water and nutrient resources, and how these shifts affect arthropod communities. Closing this gap will contribute to predicting how plants will respond to future climate scenarios, such as increases in drought and floods. This is particularly critical for hemp producers to remain compliant with legal standards and prevent the loss of crops to pest insects. Here, we examine the effects of water availability on the phytochemical profiles of agricultural

Untargeted metabolomic approaches are likely to offer new insights into these issues and into the ecological functions of hemp chemistry, as well as potential uses. The Agricultural Act of 2018, also known as the Farm Bill, legalized hemp production federally in the United States, resulting in an expansion of production [

To address knowledge gaps on the chemical ecology of hemp, we designed an experiment to test how varying water stress levels affect cannabinoid biochemical pathways, phytochemical diversity, and associated arthropod diversity. We hypothesized that water stress, which is an increasingly common attribute of climate change, alters hemp’s chemistry by both altering phytochemical diversity and shifting the specific biochemical pathways involved in cannabinoid synthesis. These changes are expected to have cascading effects on interactions with other organisms, particularly colonizing arthropod communities.

### 2. Results

### 2.1. Phytochemical Diversity

Phytochemical diversity was affected most by variety (C versus L), with C plants characterized by considerably lower diversity under all treatment level concentrations (

### 2.2. Arthropods on Hemp

Diverse communities of arthropods were collected from the flowers of experimental plants (abundances are summarized in

Treatments affected the diversity and frequency of arthropod visitors, with specific patterns visible across different treatment levels and plant varieties. The SEMs provided estimates of causal relationships between arthropod diversity, cannabinoids, flood, drought, wind stress, and variety (

### 2.3. Cannabinoid Diversity

Cannabinoid concentrations (

The biochemical pathways SEM revealed subtle shifts in all metabolic pathways of cannabinoids across the different varieties (C, L) (

### 3. Methods

### 3.1. Experimental Design and Plant Cultivation

This experiment was conducted at the University of Nevada, Reno’s (UNR) outdoor greenhouse facility in 2020 (

On 11 August 2020, hand-watering ceased, and each treatment group received one hour of water drip irrigation (1.5, 3.0, 6.0 gal) each morning. Prior to initiating water treatments, leaf counts and height measurements were again recorded to capture any initial variation between plants. Once a week, an additional 2.5 gallons of water was applied to each plant to ensure uniform soil wetting and prevent the loss of drip irrigation via channeling. The amount of water needed to adequately moisten the soil was calculated by timing the duration required to fully hydrate a pot. A 30 s application, equivalent to 2.5 gallons, was determined as sufficient. To ensure drip emitters were watering accurately, periodically throughout the season, a subset of emitters was tested by placing a pot’s three emitters in a 5 gal bucket for two minutes and measuring the water released.

Water stress was evaluated using an infrared (IR) thermometer (Extech Instruments Model RH401, Nashua, NH, USA) with an emissivity setting of 0.95. The spot-to-distance ratio was 8:1, and measurements were taken at a 4-inch distance from the fan leaf, providing a field of view of approximately 0.5 inches. Care was taken to avoid detecting energy from the soil, nearby plants, or the sky, and leaves were not shaded by the IR thermometer to prevent changes in surface temperature. The IR reading was recorded once the thermometer reached a stable temperature. Soil moisture was assessed using a moisture meter, with the probe inserted two-thirds of its length into the soil, positioned midway between the pot perimeter and plant stem.

### 3.2. Insect Sampling and Plant Harvest

To assess arthropod interactions with the plants, insects were sampled by hand and by beating sheets from all 150 plants and were immediately frozen. The entire plant was sampled, and beating was standardized. Throughout the growing season, plants were randomly selected for these arthropod surveys, with a final survey conducted on each plant prior to harvest. These arthropods, mostly insects, were later identified to the lowest possible taxonomic level in the laboratory. Phytochemical diversity is likely to affect community composition in interesting ways [

Throughout the growing season, plants were randomly selected for arthropod surveys, with a final survey conducted on each plant prior to harvest. Surveys included visual searches followed by sampling by a beat sheet. Arthropods were collected in 3-ounce plastic portion cups or with an aspirator and frozen for later identification. A representative specimen of each morphotype was preserved in a reference collection at the University of Nevada Museum of Natural History. The second week of October, final inflorescence samples were collected and dried in brown paper bags under laboratory conditions to preserve their integrity for chemical analysis.

### 3.3. Chemical Analysis

All extractions, standards preparation, and chromatography were carried out using Optima grade Methanol (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), 18 MΩ water (Thermo Smart2Pure Pro, Waltham, MA, USA), and spectral-grade ammonium acetate (LiChropur, Millipore-Sigma, Burlington, MA, USA). Cannabinoid standards were obtained as 1 mg/mL solutions in MeOH from Agilent (Santa Clara, CA, USA) and pooled to constant concentration (3.00 × 10

Plants were analyzed for both untargeted metabolomics and targeted cannabinoid quantification (summarized results are provided in

Peaks, analyzed in scan mode, with a height greater than 20,000 counts were extracted, and compounds found to have a peak height greater than 100,000 in fewer than two individuals were removed. Peak areas normalized to the internal standard area and plant dry mass were then used to estimate overall phytochemical diversity. Calibration curves were generated in scan mode for cannabinoid standards using the same LC-MS conditions described above. We quantified cannabidiol (CBD), cannabidiolic acid (CBDA), cannabidivarin (CBDV), cannabigerolic acid (CBGA), cannabinol (CBN), Δ-8-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ8-THC), and Δ-9-tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (Δ9-THCA) using 6-point calibration curves of external cannabinoid standards relative to umbelliferone internal standard area (ranging in concentration from 3.00 × 10

### 3.4. Statistical Analysis

For all statistical models, plant chemistry was analyzed as the percent dry weight of specific metabolites, or as metabolite diversity based on relative percent dry weights. For diversity, we estimated the three most used hill numbers [

### 4. Discussion

Our water stress experiments using two varieties of hemp contribute to basic phytochemical diversity theory and expand on a considerable body of knowledge on applied hemp chemistry, with a new focus on how chemical shifts can affect hemp arthropods. As studies accumulate, phytochemical diversity is clearly important in mediating plant–insect interactions, and the effects on insect communities are likely to be quite different in flowers versus leaves for

We also found evidence that subtle shifts in hemp chemistry can cascade to affect arthropod diversity. Most of the research on

In contrast to overall hemp chemistry, the effects of increased CBD levels did positively affect arthropod richness, which supports hypotheses that dominant herbivores are more negatively impacted, allowing for the colonization of a broader mix of herbivores and their enemies [

Using simple causal modeling, we found strong support for biochemical causal hypotheses suggested by the well-studied cannabinoid pathways, which is no surprise, but this approach could be used to test other hypothesized biochemical pathways. It was also interesting to see clear shifts in the compositions of cannabinoids based on variety and water stress, suggesting that these pathways are responsive to environmental cues.

In sum, our results provide important insights into the potential ecological consequences of hemp phytochemical diversity. These relationships could be important in hemp agricultural settings, where the goal is to maintain lower abundances of insects, such as the corn earworm (