### Introduction

Cancer progression results from the cumulating of random genetic mutation and the selection of cells harboring mutations that award them a growth advantage under certain conditions. Cancer is the main cause of death worldwide, accounting for about 10 million deaths in 2020, or nearly one in six deaths [

Diet and physical activity are the main behavioral and environmental risk factors for cancer death worldwide [

Many studies have shown that a plant-based diet and certain food groups, such as fruits, vegetables, whole grains, legumes, and nuts, are anti-cancer [

As a result, a diet rich in phytochemicals can have an effective role in cancer. McCarty et al created a straightforward and functional instrument called dietary phytochemical index (DPI) to present the phytochemical content of a complete diet [

To the best of our knowledge, no meta-analytic studies have been performed in this field, and the need for studies with pooled results has been recognized to achieve a synthesis on this topic. Therefore, in the current meta-analysis, we aimed to assess the literature of observational studies looking at the relationship between DPI and cancer risk and pool together all the evidence to explore whether a higher DPI results in lower odds of cancer.

### Materials and methods

### Search strategy

We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies investigating the association of DPI with cancer risk. PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science databases were searched for all relevant published articles up to December 2024. Only articles published in English were considered in this systematic review and meta-analysis. We conducted a systematic search using the following related MeSH (medical subject heading) terms and keywords: “dietary phytochemical” or “dietary phytochemical index” or “DPI” combined with “cancer” or “tumor” or “malignance” or “neoplasm” or “carcinoma” (

### Ethics statement

The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences at the Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran (Ethics Code: IR.SBMU.ENDOCRINE.REC.1403.018).

### Inclusion and exclusion criteria

All identified papers were exported to Endnote software. Two investigators screened publications independently through refinement of titles, abstracts, and the full text to select relevant papers based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Disagreements between the two reviewers were resolved by discussion and consensus with a third person. Original articles that fulfilled the following criteria were included in the present systematic review and meta-analysis: (1) were conducted in the adult population (18 years and older); and (2) studies with observational design that reported the hazard ratio (HR) or odds ratio (OR) with 95% confidence interval (CI). We also excluded meta-analyses, reviews, randomized clinical trials (RCT), unpublished data, conference letters, and gray literature. The patients, exposure, comparison, and outcome (PECO) description can be observed in

### DPI definition

DPI was computed based on the method developed by McCarty, which was as follows: DPI [

### Data extraction

Information on the characteristics of the studies and participants including author’s name, publication date, research location, number of cases and controls, participants’ age and sex, tools used for dietary assessment, types of cancer, compared categories, reported OR with 95% CI for the association between DPI and cancers risk, adjusted covariates, Newcastle-Ottawa scale (NOS) score were collected by H.A, M.O and N.A.

### Quality assessment

A methodological quality assessment of the qualified studies was evaluated using the NOS designed for the case-control design by two reviewers, independently (

### Statistical analysis

The current meta-analysis includes 8 eligible papers that consist of 9 case-control studies. We extracted the OR with 95% CI for all case-control studies and transformed them into log OR, and then their standard error (SE) was computed. A random-effects model with an inverse variance weighting method was used to estimate the overall effect size. Between-study heterogeneity was assessed using I

### Results

### Search results

The study selection process is illustrated in

### Study characteristics

### Meta-analysis on DPI and cancer risk

As indicated in

### Publication bias

A visual inspection of the funnel plot and Egger’s test indicated that there was no publication bias in the association between DPI and cancer risk (P-value =  0.561, Egger’s test) (

### Sensitivity analysis

We conducted a sensitivity analysis using a random-effects model, excluding none of the studies that had a considerable change on the pooled effect size of the association between DPI and risk of cancer (range: 0.33–0.38) (

### Discussion

In the current meta-analysis, we comprehensively reviewed the association of DPI with various types of cancer risk. The results of our study indicated that a diet with higher scores of DPI could significantly reduce the risk of various types of cancer. Also, the result of subgroup analysis based on types of cancer (BC and other types of cancer) showed that a high DPI score diet was associated with reducing the risk of BC. No evidence of heterogeneity was observed among the included studies for DPI which strengthened the statistical power to approve our findings.

To the best of our knowledge, there is no systematic review and meta-analysis on the possible association between DPI and the risk of cancers, however, the extracted pooled results of the current study are in line with findings of recent systematic reviews that have investigated the relationship between antioxidant compounds with the risk of cancers, and interesting and significant results have been obtained [

As we said earlier, after subgroup analysis based on types of cancer, the results still remained significant. Types of cancer utilized for our meta-analysis were BC (Aghababayan et al., Ghoreishi et al., Pinar et al., and Bahadoran et al., studies) and other types of cancer (Rigi et al. and Bentyaghoob et al. studies) which can convey this message for us that higher DPI diet can be effective in the initiation phase of all type of cancer and can hinder formation of tumor cells at the first place. In line with our result, a review study explained that phytochemicals can contribute to the initiation phase of cancer and can prevent cancer incidence [

The mechanism and biological pathways explaining the noticeable role of a higher score of DPI in reducing the risk of a wide span of cancers can be as follows; high DPI score diets mostly contain high amounts of fruits, vegetables (excluding potatoes), legumes, whole grains, nuts, seeds, fruit/vegetable juices, soy products, wine, beer, cider and foods compounded that consist of a lot of fiber, antioxidant and valuable vitamins [

As strengths of this study can be mentioned; the current meta-analysis was the first study that investigated the overall outcome of all observational studies conducted on the association of DPI and cancer risk. Another strength of the present study is that we did not observe heterogeneity in the results of the analyzed studies. Furthermore, there was no significant publication bias among the analyzed studies which can make a better image for the final results of this study. Despite this, the limitations of the present study deserve to be mentioned. Firstly, the small number of eligible studies for the present meta-analysis, all of which were case-control in nature, has limited our ability to explore the exact causal relationship between DPI and the risk of various types of cancers. We also know that the type ranges of cancer vary, and this fact can affect the definitive conclusion. Also, eight of nine studies included in this systematic review study were conducted in Iran, because of a lack of data on some items that existed in the DPI diet (e.g., wine, beer, and cider) due to regional and religious sensitivity, they could not attain exact score for their study that can damage overall outcome this meta-analysis. Finally, five out of the nine studies were conducted on women as well as eight out of nine included studies were conducted in Iran which might challenges in generalizing findings across genders and countries.

### Conclusion

In conclusion, the results of the meta-analysis showed that adherence to high DPI diets has a promising improvement in reducing of risk of different types of cancer, especially BC. In general, although the pooled results from our study supported the claim that a diet with higher scores of DPI could be a good dietary pattern for preventing cancer, due to the limited number of studies, their case-control nature included in the current meta-analysis, more observational studies especially with prospective design and larger sample sizes are needed to perform on various society with different food habits to explore a causal relationship and approve the predictive value of DPI in cancer.

### Supporting information