### 1. Introduction

Fenugreek (

It is noteworthy to mention that a plethora of the literature has been reported with regard to the characterization and extraction of different phytochemical classes present in fenugreek seeds such as flavonoids, phenolics, alkaloids, saponins, and flavonoids glycosides [

The concept presented in the current study deal with the phytochemical analysis of the fenugreek seeds vs. the correlation with the biological activities of cytotoxicity, antibacterial, antifungal, and α-amylase conducted in-house. The detailed studies for the phytochemical classes of flavonoids and alkaloid were performed previously as reported [

There is a significant correlation between the phytochemical composition (saponins, phenolics, flavonoids, and alkaloids) of fenugreek seeds and their biological activities, including cytotoxicity, antibacterial, antifungal, and α-amylase inhibition. This study aims to investigate the phytochemical composition of fenugreek seeds from diverse origins and analyze their correlation with biological activities (cytotoxicity, antibacterial, antifungal, and α-amylase inhibition) using statistical models. The findings will contribute to understanding the functional potential of fenugreek phytochemicals in relation to their bioactivities.

### 2. Materials and Methods

### 2.1. Strains, Cells, Cell Culture Media, and Standard Drugs/Chemicals Used

The strains used in this study consisted of

### 2.2. Collection, Extraction, and Analysis for Fenugreek Samples

The fenugreek seed samples from five different origins were collected and extracted in three different solvents. The extracts were dried and the yield were calculated as reported in the previous studies [

### 2.3. Cell Culture Studies

For cell culture studies, the three cell lines of MCF7, HT29, and MRC5 were maintained in the RPMI1640 medium whereas the HepG2 cell line was cultured in DMEM. The media were supplemented with 10%FBS and 1% penicillin-streptomycin antibiotic (10,000 units of penicillin +10,000 µg of streptomycin) and maintained at 37 °C in 5% CO

### Determination of Cytotoxicity and Selectivity

Previously reported MTT assay was used to determine the cytotoxicity of the extracts in MCF7, HT29, HepG2, and MRC5 cell lines [

### 2.4. Antimicrobial Studies

### 2.4.1. Preparation of Standard Inoculum

The tested bacterial strains were grown on Muller Hinton (MH) agar medium whereas

### 2.4.2. Diffusion Assay on Agar Plates

For the agar well diffusion assay, tested strains (100 μL) with 0.5 McFarland turbidity were swabbed on the agar plate surfaces as per the reported protocol [

### 2.4.3. MIC and MBC Determination

The extracts with a significant zone of inhibitions were further assessed for MIC and MBC where a 96-well microtiter plate was used to prepare two-fold dilutions for the extracts at 50, 25, 12.5, 6.2, and 3.1 mg/mL. The 0.5 McFarland turbidity standards (10 μL) for

### 2.5. Alpha-Amylase Inhibition Activity

A previously reported method was adopted for α-amylase inhibition [

* absorbance of the reaction mixture in the presence of the extract, ** absorbance of the mixture without the enzyme, and *** absorbance of the reaction mixture in the absence of any extract.

### 2.6. Statistical Analysis

The results for the dataset were entered into an SPSS (statistical package for social science students V27.0) software and statistical models for the correlation and paired differences were applied. The descriptive data, i.e., mean ± standard deviation (SD), were generated from triplicate readings. The GraphPad Prism 9.2.0 (GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA) software was used to determine the significant differences for the control vs. standard groups at

### 3. Results

### 3.1. Cytotoxicity Results

The extracts with more %inhibition for HT29 constructed a descending order of cell viability: 11 ± 0.08 (IR3M) > 17 ± 0.06 (Q1M) > 19 ± 0.13 (IR2M) > 21 ± 0.10 (E2M) > 28 ± 0.14 (E1M) > 33 ± 0.11 (Y1M) > 42 ± 0.05 (E3M). For MCF7, the descending order observed for cell viability (%) was 9 ± 0.05 (IR2M) > 12 ± 0.05 (IR3M) > 13 ± 0.08 (Y1M) > 24 ± 0.19 (E2M) > 30 ± 0.11 (E1M) > 37 ± 0.09 (Q1M) > 44 ± 0.05 (E3M). The remaining samples for the fenugreek extracts showed more cell viability, i.e., the cell inhibition for the HT29 and MCF7 cell lines was >50%. The data for cell viability (%) are presented in

### Determination of IC

The IC

### 3.2. Antimicrobial Activity Results

The antimicrobial activity for fenugreek extracts against SF revealed a significant zone of inhibitions (ZOI: mm) for E2M (16) > E3C (15) > E2C (14). The samples of E1H, E1C, E1M, E2H, E3M, I1H, I3H, Q2H, and IR2H were seen with ZOI in the range of 10–13 mm, whereas the remaining samples were inactive to inhibit the growth of SF. For SA, the fenugreek extracts with significant results were E1M (25 mm) > E2C (24 mm) > E2H (22 mm). The extracts of I2C, I3H, Q2H, Y1C, Y3H, Y3C, Y3M, IR1H, IR2H, IR3H, and IR3C exhibited the ZOI in the range of 11–15 mm, whereas the remaining samples showed a lack of activity against SA. For antimicrobial activity against AB, only the Y2M sample (13 mm) was seen, whereas the inhibition against PA was seen for Q3H (12 mm) and Y2M (12 mm) only. None of the samples showed any inhibition for CA. The ZOIs for the fenugreek extracts against SA, SA, AB, PA, and CA are given in

### Determination of MIC and MBC

The MIC showed the lower value of 6.3 (mg/mL) for E2C, E2M, E3C [Egypt origin samples] and I3H [Indian origin sample] extracts against SF and for the E1M [Egypt origin sample], Y3C [Yemen origin sample], IR2H, IR3H, and IR3C [Iran origin samples] extracts against SA.

The MBC values exhibited the lower value of 12.5 (mg/mL) for E2C, E2M, E3C [Egypt origin samples] and I3H [Indian origin sample] against SF compared to samples E1M [Egypt origin sample], Y3C [Yemen origin sample], IR2H, IR3H, and IR3C [Iran origin samples] against SA. The data for the MIC and MBC are shown in

### 3.3. Alpha-Amylase Inhibition Results

The results for α-amylase inhibitory activity (%) for the fenugreek extracts showed a descending order: 89 ± 0.10 (Y3C) > 89 ± 0.16 (Q1H) > 83 ± 0.03 (Y2C) > 77 ± 0.08 (I3C) > 77 ± 0.21 (Q3C) > 77 ± 0.13 (E3H) > 64 ± 0.22 (I2C) > 63 ± 0.17 (I1C) > 61 ± 0.24 (E1C) > 54 ± 0.07 (E3C). The remaining samples were seen with α-amylase inhibition of <50%. The data for α-amylase %inhibition for all the fenugreek extracts are shown in

### Determination of IC

The IC

### 3.4. Statistical Models

### 3.4.1. Descriptive Statistics

For the biological activities, the cytotoxicity for HT29 and MCF7 (

The antimicrobial results showed the mean (mm) ± SD (

The descriptive results for the flavonoids were seen with a mean (ppm) ± SD and range (minimum–maximum) of 66.87 ± 143.02 and 0–499.1 (RT), 10.33 ± 34.02 and 0–212.0 (QT), 1.91 ± 3.32 and 0–14.1 (LT), and 0.36 ± 1.88 and 0–11.9 (KF).

For the alkaloid TG, a mean (ppb) ± SD of 181.37 ± 176.37 was observed in the range (minimum–maximum) of 22–535. The data for the descriptive statistics are provided in

### 3.4.2. Correlation Studies

The Pearson’s model was used to highlight the significant correlations for the biological activities of the fenugreek seed extracts vs. the phytochemical classes of flavonoids (FV) and alkaloid (AL). A high positive correlation was noted for the cell line activity (HT29 and MCF7: 0.66,

### 3.4.3. Principle Component Analysis (PCA)

The principal component model was executed to analyze the variability of the dependent variables (DVs) within the groups. The scree plot suggested four components with a cumulative variance of 72.83% and individual variances of 24.58% (PC1), 21.26% (PC2), 14.94% (PC3), and 12.05% (PC4). The DVs loaded in PC1 were FV_ (RT, QT, LT, and KF), which suggest more %variance, i.e., a high positive inter-correlation for these activities vs. phytochemical classes. Following PC1, the next component with more %variability was PC2 (21.26) where the DV loaded was AL_TG with HT29 and MCF7. PC3 (14.94%) was loaded with AB and PA whereas, SF, SA, and amylase were loaded in PC4. The model was seen as significant at

### 3.4.4. K-Mean Analysis

The K-mean statistical model is applied to distribute a dataset into various clusters based on the similarities among the DVs. Herein, ten different clusters were suggested with the number of samples in each cluster as cluster 1 (7), cluster 2 (15), cluster 3 (4), cluster 4 (6), cluster 5 (8), cluster 6 (1), cluster 7 (1), cluster 8 (1), cluster 9 (1), and cluster 10 (1).

More HT29 and MCF7 activity was observed in sample loaded in cluster 6: IR2M [Iranian origin extracted in MeOH]. This sample was seen with the highest amount of LT. cluster 7 consisted of the sample I2M [Indian origin extracted in MeOH] with moderate HT29 and MCF7 activity where the presence for all the studied phytochemicals of FV and AL was noted in the sample. The highest antimicrobial activity for AB and PA alongwith a moderate activity for HT29 and MCF7 was observed for sample Y2M [Yemen origin extracted in MeOH] as shown in cluster 8. This sample was noted with the highest amount of TG. Cluster 9 was loaded with sample I3M [Indian origin extracted in MeOH] which is enriched with the highest amount of RT, QT, LT and KF alongwith a moderate amount of TG. This sample was seen with a good HT29 and MCF7 activity as well as a minor activity for amylase inhibition. The sample Q3H [Saudi Origin extracted in n-hexane] with the highest antimicrobial activity against PA was seen in cluster 10 where a small amount of LT was observed in the sample. The samples of E3H [Egyptian origin extracted in n-hexane], I2C & I3C [Indian origin extracted in chloroform], Y2C & Y3C [Yemen origin extracted in chloroform], and Q1H [Saudi origin extracted in n-hexane] with the highest inhibition for amylase activity were loaded in cluster 4. The fenugreek extracts in the remaining clusters presented a scattered pattern for the activities along with a low correlation with the phytochemicals. The F- and

### 3.4.5. Paired Samples

The paired samples

### 4. Discussion

Fenugreek seeds are acknowledged for their diverse biological activities associated with the presence of a number of phytochemical classes. This research study aims to establish a potential correlation for the key phytochemical classes of flavonoids and alkaloids reported in the fenugreek seeds with the cytotoxicity, antimicrobial, and α-amylase inhibitory activity tested herein. The extracts for the fenugreek seeds put into use for the biological activities were extracted in our previous study [

The antimicrobial potential for the fenugreek seed extracts was studied against the bacterial (SF, SA, AB, and PA) and fungal strains (CA). The extracts exhibited potential antibacterial activity against SF (E2M, E3C, and E2C), SA (E1M, E2C, and E2H), AB (Y2M), and PA (Q3H and Y2M); however, a lack of antifungal activity was recorded for all the extracts against CA. The results from the previous studies presented a potential effect for fenugreek extract against Gram-positive (

The α-amylase inhibition for the extracts was studied where an initial screening at a dose of 500 μg/mL for each fenugreek extract was employed to acquire the extracts with an α-amylase inhibitory potential of >50%. The result yielded the Y3C, Q1H, Y2C, I3C, Q3C, E3H, I2C, I1C, E1C, and E3C extracts with an inhibition of >50% for α-amylase. The mentioned extracts were selected and studied further at six different low-dose concentrations to calculate the IC

The statistical models were applied to link the significant correlations and paired differences among the biological activities vs. the phytochemicals analyzed for these extracts. The Pearson’s analysis revealed a high positive correlation for the inhibitory effect upon the HT29 and MCF7 cell lines with the extracts possessing the phytochemical classes of flavonoids (RT, QT, LT, and KF) and the alkaloid TG. As well as cytotoxicity, the α-amylase inhibitory activity was noticed in the extracts containing a significant amount of the flavonoids and alkaloid. Likewise, the antimicrobial activity against SF and SA was recognized in the fenugreek extracts containing more amounts of TG and LT. To comprehend the correlation link between the phytochemical classes and biological activities, component analysis was performed to bring out the variables with less inter-variability, i.e., more correlation, loaded in the same components. As evident from the PCA data, the cytotoxicity and α-amylase activities were loaded alongside the flavonoids and alkaloid whereas the variables for antimicrobial activity were loaded in one cluster, suggesting a prominent role for the analyzed phytochemical classes in the biological activities of fenugreek seeds. However, the sample pool was larger with 45 different fenugreek seed extracts, hence K-mean analysis was utilized to highlight the seed extracts with more phytochemical amounts and higher activity. Interestingly, K-mean analysis clustered the extracts with the most potent biological activities containing a significant amount of either flavonoids and alkaloid, or altogether. For instance, the designated extracts (phytochemical class) were: IR2M [Iranian origin] with more cytotoxicity against MCF7 and HT29; I2M [Indian origin] with moderate HT29 and MCF7; Y2M [Yemen origin] with the highest antimicrobial activity against AB and PA alongwith a moderate activity for HT29 and MCF7; I3M [Indian origin] with a significant activity against HT29 and MCF7 activity as well as a minor activity for amylase inhibition; Q3H [Saudi Origin] with the highest antimicrobial activity against PA; E3H [Egyptian origin], I2C & I3C [Indian origin], Y2C & Y3C [Yemen origin], and Q1H [Saudi origin] with the highest inhibition for amylase activity.

The K-mean cluster activity was further confirmed by the paired sample

The variation in the phytochemical composition of the fenugreek seeds and its biological activities thereof are prone to a number of factors including the geographical variation where the factors of humidity, salinity, altitude, soil composition, temperature, water irrigation, soil water retention capacity, annual rainfall level, and pH of the soil play a substantial role. In addition, the harvesting time, seeds processing, shipment, and its storage are the key factors to be considered for preserving the optimal quality of the seeds or plants [

These phytochemical classes owe the potential to inhibit the initiation of carcinogenesis via modulation of the phase I and II carcinogen-metabolizing enzymes as well as inhibition of oxygen radical-forming enzymes that contribute to DNA synthesis and inhibition of protein kinases playing a role in the proliferative signal transduction and cell cycle. The flavonoids suppress tumor development through the induction of cellular apoptosis mediated via suppression of DNA topoisomerase and p53, induction of autophagy, inhibition of telomerase, and triggering of mitochondrial toxicity [

Likewise, the phytochemical class of alkaloids is well known for its antioxidant, anticancer, and antidiabetic medicinal uses. Alkaloids are accepted as one of the richest and most productive sources of drug discovery, particularly with regard to cancer treatments. The in vitro and in vivo experiments have revealed the potential anticancer properties of alkaloids, mediated through interactions with various aspects of tumor progression. The alkaloids may induce caspase-dependent and caspase-independent apoptosis as well as modulate both the pro-apoptotic BAX/BAK and anti-apoptotic BCL-2 protein expression. They also regulate autophagy through the modulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinases, and reactive oxygen species. In addition, they arrest the cell cycle at different stages through the regulation of a cyclin-dependent kinase family of proteins. They suppress angiogenesis, invasion and metastasis in a variety of cancer cell lines through inhibition of focal adhesion kinase, vascular endothelial growth factor, and matrix metalloproteinase [

### 5. Conclusions

This research work provides a comprehensive correlation for the multiple classes of fenugreek seed extracts (flavonoids and alkaloid) in establishing its role in cytotoxicity, antimicrobial, and antidiabetic activity (α-amylase inhibition). The in-depth statistical analysis for the multiple classes of the fenugreek seed extracts substantiates a significant role for the flavonoids (QT, LT, KF, AG) and alkaloid (TG) to inhibit the cell growth for MCF7 and HT29, microorganisms (SF, and SA), and α-amylase activity. Herein, the study establishes the pharmacological role for the fenugreek seeds to be properly correlated with the traditional uses of fenugreek. The samples of IR2M, IR2 and 3H, IR2 and 3H, IR3C [Iran origin samples], E2 and 3C, E1 and 2M [Egypt origin samples], I3H [Indian origin], and Q1H [Saudi origin] were more effective for the biological activities. This study may be helpful for the quality control and standardization of fenugreek to evaluate and authenticate the fenugreek seeds as well as the pharmaceutical products and dietary supplements for the presence of the essential key elements of flavonoids and alkaloid. The major insight that the current study provides is the identification and correlation of the fenugreek phytochemical class and its respective chemical moiety responsible for the claimed medicinal uses; hence, this paves a way for researchers to isolate and utilize the same chemical moiety for the established medicinal use. The identified compounds may be utilized as biomarkers for plant-based drug discovery and bioengineering to open avenues for genetic modification in order to enhance the yield for the phytochemical compounds. The future directives may include in-depth study for the geographical variation affecting the metabolites’ number and concentration. In addition, the identified metabolites may be enhanced for their yield within the same source, utilizing the genetic biodiversity and gene manipulations technique.