### Introduction

Cancer is a leading cause of death in the world, with the cancer burden being greater in developing countries [

Leukaemia is the most common childhood cancer, accounting for 30% of all cancer cases diagnosed in children under the age of fifteen [

Despite the effectiveness of chemotherapy in destroying cancer cells, this method may have some drawbacks, as some cancer cells may become resistant to the drugs. Furthermore, most chemotherapeutic drugs damage both normal and cancerous cells, leading to other health problems [

In Zimbabwe, over 75% of the population relies on medicinal plants for primary healthcare [

A significant contribution made by Mlilo and Sibanda [

### Materials and Methods

### Chemicals

Analytical-grade chemicals and drugs were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Steinheim, Germany) for the study. This included methanol, Foetal Bovine Serum (FBS), Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 media (RPMI), reduced-glutathione (GSH), penicillin and streptomycin solution (PNS), Hanks Buffered Saline Solution (HBSS), foetal calf serum (FCS), trichloroacetic acid (TCA), sulforhodamine B (SRB), trizma base, sodium hypochlorite, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), trypan blue dye, chlorambucil, camptothecin and phytochemical screening reagents.

### Collection and authentication of plant material

The plant species were collected from five districts of the Matebeleland region (Bulawayo, Gwanda, Hwange, Matobo and Tsholotsho) between September and December 2018. Approval to collect plant samples was sought from the relevant Rural District Councils (RDC) and Community Leaders. The samples were collected using sustainable harvesting methods to minimise the impact on biodiversity. Plant specimens were deposited at the Zimbabwe National Herbarium and Botanical Garden in Harare, Zimbabwe, for identification and authentication. The plants were identified by Anthony Mapaura and deposited specimens were filed by Christopher Chapano. Table

### Extraction of plant material

Fresh leaves, stem barks, fruits, tubers, or roots were collected from September to December 2018 using traditional sampling methods. These plants were first washed with distilled water to remove soil and dust particles. The plant materials were air-dried at room temperature (25 – 30℃) in the shade, pulverised into a fine powder with a blender (MRC Laboratory Blender model 800-G, Waring Commercial) and kept in sealed containers in the dark until required for analysis. Maceration was employed as a method of extraction using methanol solvent. Known weights (200 g) of powdered material were loaded onto a fritted glass column. The material was allowed to stand in 1000 mL of methanol for 24 h to allow the soluble phytochemicals to dissolve. The extract was filtered after 24 h and fresh solvent was added and this procedure was repeated twice. The solvent was removed using a rotary evaporator at 37℃. The dry samples were placed in airtight sample tubes and kept in the fridge at -4℃ until needed.

### The cytotoxic effects of crude methanolic plant extracts on normal animal cells

Animal cells were used in the experimental work and researchers prioritised animal welfare and ensured responsible experimental designs were followed. All tissue culture experiments were carried out following relevant ethical regulations. Experimental protocols used in this study were approved by the National University of Science and Technology Ethics Committee (NUST/IRB/2022/48).

### The cytotoxic effect of methanolic plant extracts on normal murine peritoneal cells

Mice used in this study were obtained from the University of Zimbabwe Animal House. The normal murine peritoneal cells were isolated from 6–8 week-old mice using a method previously described by Ray and Dittel [

### The cytotoxic effect of methanolic plant extracts on sheep erythrocytes

Sheep erythrocytes were used in this assay and were obtained from the University of Zimbabwe Animal House. The haemolysis assay was conducted according to the procedure previously documented by Mapfunde et al. [

### Effect of reduced-glutathione (GSH) on crude plant extracts

The effect of GSH on the activity of the most cytotoxic methanolic extracts on normal murine peritoneal cells was investigated. To a 12-well plate, the following samples were added in triplicates: cells only; cells + GSH; cells + extract; cells + extract + GSH. The GSH concentration utilised was 25 µg/mL, while the plant extracts were tested at their highest concentration of 250 µg/mL. The plates were incubated at 37℃ with 5% CO₂ for 72 h. The Trypan blue dye exclusion method was used to count the number of viable cells.

### The antiproliferative effect of methanolic plant extracts on cancer cell lines

### The effect of crude methanolic plant extracts on Jurkat T cell lines

The in vitro antiproliferative activity was assessed on Jurkat E6-1 human leukaemic T lymphoblastoid cell lines (Hudson Alpha/Caltech ENODE). The cells were grown in RPMI-1640 media supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% PNS solution at 37℃ with 5% CO

### The effect of crude methanolic plant extracts on HL60 cell lines

The antiproliferative effect of extracts was assessed on HL60 cell lines (European Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures; (ECACC), U K). A colourimetric SRB assay was used to assess growth inhibition in a manner previously described by Skehan et al., with minor modifications [

### Selectivity index

Selectivity index (SI) was calculated for the most cytotoxic extracts, this was done to assess the safety of the extracts [

### Phytochemical screening

The methanolic plant extracts were screened for various phytoconstituents. Screening was done for the following phytoconstituents: alkaloids, saponins, phenolic compounds, steroids, phytosteroids, anthraquinones, terpenoids, quinones, tannins, and coumarins. The tests were conducted according to standard methods by Guevara; and Harbone [

### Data analysis

GraphPad Prism 8 for Windows (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, California, USA) version 8.02 was used to analyse the results using a one-way analysis of variance test (ANOVA) with Dunnett’s Multiple Comparison Test. Values with a

### Results

### Extraction of plant material

A total of thirteen medicinal plant species were selected from a previous ethnobotanical survey conducted by Mlilo and Sibanda [

### The cytotoxic effects of methanolic plant extracts on normal cells

### The effects of extracts on normal murine peritoneal cells

The cytotoxic effects of thirteen plant methanolic extracts on normal murine peritoneal cells are shown in Fig.

### The effect of methanolic plant extracts on sheep erythrocytes

Haemolysis assay was conducted on the four plant extracts

### The effect of reduced-glutathione (GSH) on the activity of cytotoxic extracts on normal murine peritoneal cells

The effects of GSH were investigated on the extracts which reduced cell viability of normal murine peritoneal cells by more than 50%, specifically

### The antiproliferative effect of methanolic plant extracts on cancer cell lines

### The effect of plant extracts on Jurkat T cell lines

A total of thirteen crude methanolic plant extracts were subjected to the antiproliferation assay on Jurkat T cell lines at a concentration of 250 µg/mL, the results are shown in Fig.

### The effect of plant extracts on HL60 cell lines

The antiproliferative effect of thirteen crude methanolic extracts was also assessed on HL60 cell lines at a concentration of 250 µg/mL. The results are shown in Fig.

### Selectivity Index (SI) of potent methanolic plant extracts

The SI values for Jurkat T and HL60 cell lines versus normal murine peritoneal cells were determined for the most potent plant extracts (

### Phytochemical screening of methanolic plant extracts

Thirteen plant extracts were screened for different classes of phytoconstituents and the results are shown in Table

### Discussion

Plants are a rich source of natural compounds and the importance of such compounds has been proven since time immemorial [

### The cytotoxic effects of methanolic plant extracts on normal cells

### The effects of plant extracts on normal murine peritoneal cells

Cytotoxicity is an important factor in the search for novel anticancer agents from plants. It is the toxic effect of a compound that leads to cell death [

Mistletoes

### The effect of plant extracts on sheep erythrocytes

Haemolysis assay on sheep erythrocytes was used in this study to evaluate the effect of cytotoxic extracts on membrane integrity [

Plant extracts were considered to be haemolytic if the percentage of haemolysis was greater than 30% as a study by Khursheed et al. [

### The effect of reduced-glutathione (GSH) on the activity of cytotoxic extracts on normal murine peritoneal cells

It is common practice for cancer patients to use dietary supplements with antioxidants during or after conventional cancer treatments to enhance the benefits of the treatment and prevent side effects [

Reduced-glutathione (GSH) is a naturally occurring antioxidant that plays a critical role in defence, cellular process regulation, and nutrient metabolism [

### The antiproliferative effect of plant extracts on cancer cell lines

Antiproliferative assays are widely used to assess the effectiveness of potential anticancer agents [

### The effect of plant extracts on Jurkat T and HL60 cell lines

The plant species

It was noted that

The results revealed that the activity of methanolic plant extracts increased with an increase in the concentration of extract, which is consistent with previous studies by Gul et al. and Pieme et al. [

In the present study

### Selectivity Index (SI) of potent plant extract

Chemotherapy is the most widely used treatment for leukaemia, involving the use of drugs to slow the growth or destroy cancerous cells [

To identify extracts that are both active on cancer cell lines and safe for normal cells, Selectivity Index (SI) values were calculated for potent extracts. An SI value of less than 1 meant that the plant extract was non-selective (toxic), between 1 and 10 the extract was weakly selective and greater than 10 meant the plant was safe (non-toxic), leading to better outcomes and fewer side effects for patients [

### Phytochemical Screening of plant extracts

Phytochemicals are responsible for the biological activities of plant extracts [

Flavonoids have recently gained importance due to their anticancer properties [

Saponins have shown potential in cancer treatment due to their ability to inhibit tumour cell growth, induce apoptosis, and suppress angiogenesis [

### Conclusion

The evaluation of antiproliferative, cytotoxic and phytochemical properties of Zimbabwean medicinal plants used in cancer treatment has provided valuable insight into their therapeutic effect. Plants that showed potential antiproliferative effects included