### Introduction

All fruits and vegetables are linked which health health-enhancing activity as they are richly endowed with essential nutritional components. Various investigations about the uses of medicinal plants identified that not only fruits and vegetables but their other parts such leaf, peels, and seeds are also possess beneficial activities (

A wide range of phytochemicals, polysaccharides, vitamins, minerals, and carbohydrates are present in high amounts in various parts of pomegranate fruit such as the leaf, seed and root. The seeds of pomegranate contain alpha-linolenic acid, linoleic acid, oleic acid, and fatty acids that have many nutraceutical properties as mentioned in

The therapeutic efficacy of fruits and their various parts due to their valuable chemical compounds make them highly beneficial. Pomegranates contain a higher amount of nutrients compared to many other fruit plants, providing giving 80 kcal per 100 g of serving. The inedible portions, such as peel and seeds, are also good sources of nutrients, though they are often wasted are by food industries. Byproducts of pomegranate juice such as peel, seed, leaf, and husk comprises high quantity of nutraceutical properties. Pomegranate peel, which comprises 30–40% of fruit, offers a variety of offers beneficial biological effects and could help resist pathological problems. The loss of waste products, such as inedible portions of fruits, not only increases food waste but also contributes to loss of essential nutrients (

### Method

To gather the relevant material, the keywords “pomegranate”, “waste product”, “therapeutics”, and “pharmacology” were searched in journals accessible through databases such as ScienceDirect, Scopus, EBSCO, Medline, PubMed, Embase, SID, and Iran Medex. Duplicate papers were removed, and only one version of each was retained.

### Phytochemical composition of pomegranate

The experimental results of many studies have shown that the bioactive compounds in the extract of pomegranate peel leaf, and seeds the possess curative properties and with the potential to treat various health-related pathological conditions. Among all the bioactive compounds in pomegranate peel, tannins, flavonoids, alkaloids, phenols, flavonoids, alkaloids, steroids are present in abundance. In addition to phenolic compounds, pomegranate peel also contains various dietary fiber, vitamins, and minerals. These compounds have the potential to support and maintain physiological functions. The phytochemical constituents are present in pomegranate and its parts make them useful for treating different human ailments were, the correlation between these phytochemicals and human ailments showed a strong potential connection, results showed showing significant improvement in human health (

### Health benefits of pomegranate

Pomegranate and its various parts are nutritionally rich and provide exceptional benefits to overall human health. Pomegranate contains many bioactive constituents that play a major role as functional foods and contribute to the improvement of human health. The most predominant phytochemical in pomegranate are anthocyanins and hydrolysable ellagitannins, which primarily contribute to the inhibition of cancer cell and help to eliminate free radicals (

### Antioxidant activity of pomegranate

Several studies have demonstrated that among different parts of pomegranate, the peel enriches with the highest amount of total polyphenolic compounds, flavonoids, carotenoids, and alkaloids. The inedible portion of fruits contains more beneficial components, which help reduce the risk of several chronic degenerative diseases. The phenolic composition of pomegranate peel has shown significant results in combating oxidative stress (

Pomegranate seed oil, rich in polyphenolic content and punicalagin, has been found to improve skin health, inhibit inflammation, and aid in cosmetic product production (

### Anti-inflammatory activity of pomegranate

From centuries, the pomegranate used to treat inflammation due to its potential anti-inflammatory capacity. Pomegranate (

Pomegranate husk exhibits anti-inflammatory properties due to phenolic components like ellagic acid, suppressing nitric oxide and pro-inflammatory cytokines. Recent studies show its peel extract has anticancer, antihypertensive, and anti-hypoglycemic effects (

### Anti-microbial activity of pomegranate

Pomegranate leaf, peel and seed have high number of bioactive compounds. The importance of pomegranate peel is more than other parts of fruit as it is major by-product during food processing. High potential of pomegranate peel is beneficial in preservation process as it helps to prevent food from deterioration. Pomegranate peel extract (PPE) considered as natural additive and contribute for better of quality of food. PPE is abundant with natural compounds that contribute in bio functional edible film for packaging of food products (

### Anti-fungal activity of pomegranate

Most of pomegranate peel and seeds are considered as waste but these inedible parts have substantial antimicrobial activities. Pomegranate peel and seeds are served as important potential source of antifungal agents. The seed and peel extracts of pomegranate have antimicrobial and antifungal activity against various human ailment. Anthocyanins, tannins and ellagic acid showed antifungal mechanism of action by destroying the cell membrane of pathogens and disturb their growth activity. The study investigated that the aqueous extract of pomegranate peel and seed possesses strong inhibited effect against mycelial growth of

### Anti-obesity activity of pomegranate

Globally, obesity has become major initiator to contribute to progression of several metabolic disorders. Results of several studies showed that pomegranate seeds oil (PSO) play central role in many pharmacological problems. PSO contain many important phytochemicals, one of them is Punicic acid (PA) that possesses potential anti-obesity effect and effective against various metabolic disorders. PSO have ability to treat obesity by suppressing intestinal glucose absorption, improving lipid profile and controlling body weight (

### Anti-viral activity of pomegranate

Studies reveal that 50% of pomegranate's inedible portion contains bioactive compounds, including tannins, which serve as significant anti-viral agents due to their astringent capacity (

### Anti-diabetic activity of pomegranate

Studies show pomegranate extracts and parts have therapeutic potential due to their diverse phytochemicals, including flavonoids, tannins, ellagic acid, and catechins. Food industries use by-products for functional foods (

### Anti-hypertensive activity of pomegranate

Epidemiological studies highlight the significance of dietary modifications in reducing cardiovascular disease incidence. Among these, pomegranate leaf, peel, and seed contain bioactive components with cardioprotective properties, which are important for managing heart diseases, along medicinal treatment, lifestyle changes and therapeutic diet (

### Anti-hepatotoxic activity of pomegranate

Pomegranate has the ability to scavenge excessive levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) due to action mechanism of various phytochemical components with antioxidant properties. Polyphenolic compounds such as polyphenols, particularly ellagitannins, tannins and anthocyanins help to reduce oxidative stress and enhance the activity of liver enzymes including serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST). These phenolic components also reduce toxicity by modulating the toxicity mechanism. Pomegranate peel extract have potential antioxidant and anti-hepatotoxic activity against oxidation of hepatic cells (

### Anti-osteoporosis activity of pomegranate

Pomegranate peel extract has potential anti-osteoporosis properties that help prevent the progression of bone loss. Several phytochemical compounds present in PPE such as anthocyanins, have the ability to protect from degenerative diseases including osteoporosis and osteopenia. A large number of polyphenolic components such as hydrolysable tannins, punicalagin, flavonoids and ellagic acid contribute to the therapeutic effects on bone mineral homeostasis markers (

### Industrial uses of pomegranate by products

The by-products of pomegranate peel from industries managed sustainably through various approaches. Here are some strategies to promote economic circulation, address food insecurity, and enhance human health:

The pomegranate peel and other by-products of pomegranate are utilized in managing various nutritional requirements. Nutritional deficiencies and other health related diseases can be treated by nutritional supplementation with pomegranate peel. Pomegranate peel, as a nutraceutical and supplement has shown significant potential in attenuating various chronic health problems and fulfilling individual nutritional needs. The pomegranate peel enrich with natural additives that play an important role in nutraceutical industries (

Pomegranate peel contain numerous phytochemicals and polyphenolic compounds that protect against various cattle diseases and enhance cattle feed, due to presence of ellagitannin, an important antioxidant. The high antioxidant level in ellagitannin play major role in improving cattle health. It's exceptional properties help reduce oxidation and cholesterol levels in cattle. The potential use of pomegranate peel and its extracts in the nutraceutical industry support the development of cattle feed supplement (

The pomegranate peel extract plays avital role in enhancement of plant growth, microbial protection and reduce need of fertilizers. The pomegranate peel compost on plants to identify the effect of PPE in replacement of other chemical fertilizers. The application of spray of pomegranate peel extract with showed significant improvement in soil fertility, plant growth, increased the process of photosynthetic pigments, enhance in amount of all essential minerals in soil and also increase the level of carotenoids in plant composition (

The application of pomegranate peel plays significant role in textile industry due to presence of natural dyes in chemical composition. An aqueous extract of pomegranate peel demonstrates effective antiradical activity due to photoproduction of phenols and ellagic acid. Additionally, pomegranate peel and zinc oxide are incorporated into fabrics to protect against UV radiations. The wide range of organic photoprotective components, present in pomegranate peel and its extracts is extensively used in various dye techniques (

Pomegranate peel, seeds and seed oil are extracted using different extraction techniques such solvent extraction and supercritical fluid extraction. A large number of phytochemical components in pomegranate rind and seed including ellagic acid and punicalagin. These two phytochemicals play a significant role to enhance skin health by suppressing production melanin through tyrosinase. The action mechanism of ellagic acid in pomegranate extract help to lower the oxidative stress and increase anti-inflammatory properties in skin (

The demand of energy production is increasing rapidly. Different sources of energy productions are natural gas, coal and other fossil fuels which use widely used for energy. Agricultural and industrial wastes are renewable energy sources and can be use in replacement of other energy sources. Pomegranate peel, a major industrial waste, possesses significant potential for energy production, particularly as fuel obtained through pyrolysis. The organic matter of pomegranate peel used in anaerobic digestion to produce biogas, contributing to renewable energy sources. The ash content of pomegranate peel obtained from thermal process comprise sufficient amount organic residues (

### Conclusion

Pomegranate fruit (